---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

I am currently working as a postdoctoral fellow in the Theoretical Biophysics Group at Boston University, comprised of Professors Pankaj Mehta, Kirill Korolev, Daniel Segrè, and their students and postdocs. I obtained my PhD in Physics from MIT in 2017, where I studied nonequilibrium statistical mechanics with Professor Jeremy England. When I’m not doing physics, I enjoy studying philosophy, particularly metaphysics and philosophy of science. I obtained a Master of Studies in Philosophy of Physics from Oxford University in 2012, where I did some work on foundations of classical thermodynamics with Professor Harvey Brown. I am an epistemic structural realist in my interpretation of physics, and find a lot of inspiration in the writings of Pierre Duhem. I see my role as a theorist as primarily that of identifying the quantities most useful for prediction and control, and finding effective ways of organizing the ever-growing amounts of data generated by modern biological experiments. Doing this well requires latching on to the real structure of the biological phenomena, but does not exhaust all there is to know. I admire my fellow Wisconsinite John Muir who understood this in a particularly profound way, combining a total command of current science with deep appreciation for the transcendent dimension of nature. I can see how he acquired this love of nature growing up in that beautiful state, where I also spent my childhood. Although the job of a theorist today demands spending a lot of time in front of a computer, my best ideas usually come from hiking up Mount Lafayette or strolling along the Charles River Esplanade, just soaking up the mysterious reality of what’s in front of me.

